# Dropped sentences

Forest stand structure can be thought of as an ensemble of emergent properties of ecosystem development manifest on a landscape. Studying such an ensemble at an arbitrary point in time carries inherent limitations, notably, in collapsing the legacies of past change, including disturbance history and individual life histories. Nevertheless, we start from the position that undertaking this sort of analysis is valuable (a) on its own as a contribution to the broader field of ecological gradient analysis, and (b) for improving understanding forest dynamics under novel climate forcings and anthropogenic land-use modification, in so far as it establishes a baseline against which to evaluate future change or provides a benchmark for mechanistic modeling of future scenarios.

Forest structure and composition emerge from complex "interactions between a spatially and temporally variable abiotic environment and adaptive biotic agents (e.g., trees)."

Complex interactions between adaptive biotic agents and a spatiotemporally variable environment give rise to emergent properties of forests, such as structural and compositional diversity. 

Few studies directly address microclimatic heterogeneity in high-elevation complex terrain (). Fewer still account for state-variable interactions ().

Patterns of forest structure are necessarily scale-specific and depend on different covariates at different spatial scales (Wiens 1989). 

@fricker_more_2019 found that climatic water deficit (CWD) and mean annual precipitation (MAP) explained the majority of variance in the distribution of maximum tree heights along an elevational gradient in the Sierra Nevada. 

Given the low timber value, long fire return intervals, and lack of recent management in this domain, this analysis may offer more insight into natural factors driving stand structure in a temperate conifer forest than previous efforts. 




While prior studies have found strong associations between forest structure and abiotic factors even in the presence of major harvest and disturbance events (@urban_forest_2000, @lydersen_topographic_2012, Collins et al. 2015, Stephens et al. 2015, @kane_water_2015)... 


Inferential modeling revealed three distinct patterns of relationship. (1) Density, BA, and the skewness of height were most strongly associated with snow input factors (SWE and ∆SWE), followed by topography (elevation, heat load, curvature) and AET. 
(2) Maximum height and QMD were most strongly associated with elevation, followed by snow input, and then heat load. 
(3) Species-resolved density departed from all of these trends.




Available water content based on soil composition and structure had the greatest leverage on height and BA (Fig. 7). The response in these factors was bimodal, with maxima around 0.10 and 0.18, which were approximately the mean and two standard deviations above the mean. Density, in contrast, increased monotonically with AWC but the relationship was also nonlinear. The total depth of soil showed inverse relationships with height skew (negative) versus with height, QMD, and BA (positive), but the splines were tightly kinked along the support. Soil saturated hydraulic conductivity and percent organic matter had less interpretable effects in the GAM, with high estimated degrees of freedom on the splines and large amplitudes at low values but little meaningful trend. Together they accounted for less than 10% of relative influence in any of the GBMs.


We tested three different models for estimating the allometric relationship between stem height and DBH. For each model we implemented a training and testing scheme with 80%-20% splits over 100 randomization folds. At each step, we fit model parameters to the training set and predicted $\hat{DBH}$ on the testing set using the fitted model scaled by its $\sigma^2/$. We computed the relative error (%) and RMSE between field-measured DBH and allometry-estimated DBH in the testing set. Panel A shows the relative error at each observed diameter over the 100 randomization folds. In Model 1 (green), we fit a simple log-log function between raw DBH and height values. In Model 2, we spit the raw height values into 1 cm bins and fit a log-log function to the mean height in each bin. In Model 3, we fitted a nonlinear least squares log-log model to the binned heights scaled by parameters $\beta$ and $\gamma$. Model 2 had the lowest RMSE, so we selected this model for watershed-wide prediction. For an additional validation step, we predicted DBH on field inventory observations that were not otherwise used in this analysis. Validation RMSE was 5.4 cm, and mean validation bias was 17.8%.


However, structural metrics responded differentially to specific topoclimatic factors. Inferential modeling revealed three distinct patterns of relationship. (1) Maximum height and QMD were most strongly associated with elevation, followed by snow factors (SWE and ∆SWE), and then heat load. (2) Density, BA, and the skewness of height were most strongly associated with SWE and ∆SWE, followed by topography (elevation, heat load, curvature), and AET. (3) Species mediated the density relationships. We propose that the first two patterns map coarsely to measures of individual-scale (1) and stand-scale (2) productivity. Maximum height and QMD arguably describe the potential of individuals within a stand (i.e., the height or girth that a stem is able to achieve), while total number density, basal area, and height skewness describe the potential of the stand in aggregate (i.e., the total biomass that the stand is able to produce). Although the two categories are not wholly independent, in our data, maximum height and QMD were more closely correlated with each other than with basal area, density, or height skew, and vice-versa. Moreover, the top percentiles of total density and basal area tended to occur in different spatial locations from those of height and QMD. That the relative importance of explanatory variables differed between these two groups suggests that different environmental processes may operate on individual and stand dynamics. Elevation predominated for individual-scale metrics, while SWE and ∆SWE predominated for stand-scale metrics. 


This may have to do with cold-air pooling, where minimum temperatures are depressed at low elevations, in addition to the familiar adiabatic lapse with elevations, because of downwelling of cool air into regionally low areas. The interactive effect of elevation and ∆SWE's on density suggest that this is a plausible interpretation: density was limited where low elevation and long snow residence time co-occurred. That is to say, it may be the case that where pooling cold air preserved snowpack, it also diminished recruitment.


Soil AWC (cm H~2~O cm^-1^ soil) is a measure of the water available to plants per unit depth and is parameterized in the SSURGO data as the difference in volumetric water content at field capacity ($\theta_{fc}$, measured at -10 kPa) and at the permanent wilting point ($\theta_{wp}$, measured at -1500 kPa). AWC's strongest effects on forest structure came from its interactions with AET and SWE. While the univariate smooths of AET on basal area and QMD were bimodal (Fig. 8), 

in the interaction AET's effect was virtually static at low AWC values, and the bimodal shape only emerged at AWC values around +1 s.d. from mean (Fig. 10). Since AET is an integrative measure of surface-to-atmosphere water flux, this finding may suggest that 

in sites where AWC is low, QMD and BA are HIGH and SIMILAR across all AET values - transpiration rates continuing >> soil water not a strong constraint on QMD and BA
as AWC increases, AET's association becomes more variable

that where soil AWC is low, trees rely on other sources of moisture (above or below the soil), and that where such subsidies are available (such that they facilitate high AET), 


The association between AWC and density diverged from those between AWC and height, QMD, and BA. Density generally increased with AWC, with kinks in the middle range of AWC values. However, other structural metrics varied nonlinearly with AWC, with a maximum plateau in the middle range of AWC and declines at either extreme. 

This suggested a potential decoupling of stand-scale and individual-scale dynamics. Where individual trees reach structural maxima at mid-range AWC values, stands appear to be in late successional states characterized by even stature and low density. On the other hand, at very high AWC, stands tend to be denser and less even-aged. 

One hypothesis, which could be tested through repeat measurement or dendrochronology methods, is that extreme AWC values impose stronger constraints on individual productivity than on stand-level dynamics, such as recruitment and survival. If this is the case, then while the number of trees increases with higher levels of soil available water, there may be a preferential zone of soil moisture facilitating growth for the individual.

